.. include:: /../../book/docs/shared/include/defs.rst
.. _xl.changes.2019:

=======================
Changes 2019 in Lino XL
=======================

.. Note: Changes are grouped by date. Every new day gives a new
   heading. If a release deserves separate release notes, we create a separate
   document and this file will have a link to it.

.. contents::
  :local:


2019-01-22
==========

Fixed a little bug in :mod:`lino_xl.lib.vat` : when you created an invoice in a
journal with `edit_totals` and leave the total field empty, Lino said
"TypeError: unsupported operand type(s) for -: 'NoneType' and 'Decimal'"

Added intersphinx_urls, srcref_url and doc_trees settings to the main module so
that other doctrees can link to the docs.

Released version 19.1.1

2019-01-21
==========

The change notes for :ref:`xl` are now separated from those of :ref:`lino`.

New plugin attribute :attr:`lino_xl.lib.tim2lino.Plugin.timloader_kwargs` to be
used e.g. as follows::

    def setup_plugins(self):
        self.plugins.tim2lino.configure(
            languages='de fr',
            timloader_kwargs=dict(etat_registered="C"))
        super(Site, self).setup_plugins()

This new feature is not tested because the reason was just a missing "u"
prefix.


2019-01-18
==========

The categories (:class:`lino_xl.lib.products.ProductCat`) now have a field
:attr:`product_type <lino_xl.lib.products.ProductCat.product_type>` (i.e. all
applications that depend on it need to migrate).  This is because I realized
that categories are not useless.  The difference between the "category" and the
"type" of a product is that end-users can edit the former while the latter are
to be provided by the application developer.

I fixed a subtle bug in the :meth:`lino_xl.lib.ledger.Plugin.setup_main_menu`
method: the Accounting menu came before the Sales menu because a menu for
"ledger" was being created before looping over the journal groups. I removed an
unused plugin attribute :attr:`intrusive_menu` (whether a journal group is
"intrusive" or not now depends on its :attr:`menu_group`).

2019-01-17
==========

The :attr:`ref_max_length <lino.mixins.Referrable.ref_max_length>` for
:class:`lino_xl.lib.ledger.Journal` is now 5 instead of the default 40.

Printing invoices was broken (since we changed the default build method from
appy to weasy).  It said "No template found for
sales/VatProductInvoice/default.weasy.html, excerpts/default.weasy.html". We
created a new template :xfile:`sales/VatProductInvoice/default.weasy.html` (in
the :xfile:`config` directory of :mod:`lino_xl.lib.sales`).


2019-01-04
==========

We released XL 19.1.0

The fields :attr:`addr2` and :attr:`prefix` are now mostly hidden in forms. We
consider them obsolete.  :mod:`lino_xl.lib.contacts`.


